---
kind: article
created_at: 2026-01-01 16:28 CET
title: "Xfce, the Most Boring Desktop Environment"
tags:
  - linux
---

[Xfce](https://xfce.org) has been my primary desktop environment (DE) since the mid-2000s, for both personal and professional use.
Even though hazy, I have recollections of life without Thunar, migration to GTK 3, and other age-disclosing historical milestones.
I even <%= link_to "used Xfce on a MacBook Pro (2015) for several years", @items["/blog/post/20150101-xubuntu-on-macbookpro/"] %>.
Contrary to my earlier flirts ([WindowMaker](https://www.windowmaker.org/), [Blackbox](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blackbox), which was later succeeded by [Fluxbox](https://fluxbox.org/)), I haven't really configured Xfce much either—the defaults were mostly satisfactory.

After more than two decades of usage, I can confidently say **Xfce has been the most boring desktop environment I have ever used**.
It has been through several heart surgeries, ranging from rewrites to GTK major version upgrades, yet I haven't noticed a single bump.
New DEs flourished, and primary players (GNOME & KDE) got substantial financial and development-resource reinforcements.
The harvest was a frenzy of mind-blowing, fancy new _user-visible_ DE features: tiling windows, 3D cube/zoomed workspace transitions, animations, macOS-like looks, etc.
In the meantime, **Xfce had hardly any new user-visible changes**.
It is as boring as it was at its inception; a panel at the top, and... and... yeah, pretty much nothing else — and **I love it**.

I myself work on some, mostly open-source, decades-old, massively used software (OpenJDK, Log4j, etc.) on a daily basis.
A mind-blowing effort goes into keeping such systems stable (i.e., backward compatibility), evaluating and integrating new features, and striking a good balance between the two.
Looking at things from this angle, I cannot express my gratitude enough to the Xfce developers for enabling me to carry out my daily routines with a well-thought-out, small set of basic features, and for keeping them running and up-to-date under the hood with almost no user-visible changes.
I want to thank all its _maintainers_, people who mostly do the dirty plumbing work instead of running after every new shiny thing in the market.
I want them to know they have users who are not distro-hoppers, toy-project developers, home-automation enthusiasts, or retro-computer lovers, but who deliver serious work using Xfce in their day-to-day jobs.

# Developer laptops & Linux

I've never worked at an employer where Linux was officially recognized as a developer-laptop OS.
I always needed to roll up my sleeves and walk the unbeaten path: learn how things (VPN, OTP, etc.) work on macOS/Windows and try to reproduce them on Linux.
This initial setup has mostly been, even though rewarding, time-consuming.
But I got pretty good at it over the years, and I hardly get surprised anymore.

I had the opportunity to observe macOS/Windows developers, and the sheer extent of effort they put into problems that have been solved by Linux decades ago.
They need to install a package manager, a third-party application to define key bindings, and they need to stare at a screen for several minutes during a system upgrade that happens once a month or so, and so on.
These observations just strengthened my respect and love for the Linux & Xfce setup.

What does all this have to do with Xfce?
Well, Xfce has just always worked for me.
VPN clients, IDEs, and everything I use to carry out my daily tasks worked out of the box.
Xfce simply never stood in the way, and I think that is pretty awesome.
In contrast, applications with dialog windows or taskbar interactions have always been problematic for me with other window managers.

# The working setup

I would like to take this opportunity to <s>brag about</s> share details of my personal setup.
My goal in doing so is to provide a perspective to maintainers on what users matching my profile care about.

## What I use a lot

* Panel
* Workspaces
* Thunar
* `xfce4-terminal`
* `xfce4-appfinder`
* `xfce4-display-settings`
* `xfce4-clipman`
* Window manager shortcuts (all bound to a `Super` combination):
  * Close window
  * Maximize/Drag/Resize window
  * Raise/Lower window
  * Tile window to the top/bottom/left/right
  * Switch to workspace

## What I never use

* Desktop
* Dock (i.e., macOS-like panel with buttons at the bottom)

## Applications I use along with Xfce

* Browser
* IDE
* GIMP
* GKrellM

